Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Charles Smith grew up in Bryan, graduated from EA Kemp High School in 1960.
He's been back in Bryan for just seven years and proudly calls it home.
But he was gone for 42 years.
In between, 20 years in the Army, 22 working for the U.S.
Postal Service in Fort Worth.
In the Army between 1960 and 1981, he served a tour in Vietnam as a recon squad leader.
But his duty there was cut short by malaria.
He also served four separate tours of Germany and one in South Korea.
More than four decades of public service has earned Charles Smith the retirement he now enjoys in West Bryan.
Please welcome Charles Smith to Veterans of the Valley.
It's an honor to know you, to meet you, and thank you for your service, and thank you for being here.
Talk about you.
You were born in the Brazos Valley.
You graduated from EA camp in 1960, and you went pretty much straight into the Army.
You were at Fort Hood, but then pretty soon you went overseas to Bamberg, Germany.
Talk about your first duty assignment.
Well, first of all, I graduated from aid camp on the 27th of May.
Charles Allen and I went in there on the budget session.
We was inducted in Houston, Texas.
We left there and went to Fort Carson, Colorado, while we were in process and got all the equipment for basic training.
Then moved back to Fort Hood.
for Company D, 1st Battalion, 51st Infantry, while we had our basic training.
Soon after that, seven weeks off, we went back in the AIT, and we've been the 1st Squadron, 15th Cavalry, while I've taken my scout training.
Allen went to another company,
for his his advanced training because we was only in and training basic training together and after that we split up i think he went to walfeck in germany and then i went to bamberg yeah and my unit assignment bamboo was his second squadron or seventh cavalry regiment right right now you were there uh 1961 uh that was the main year of the berlin crisis in 1961. talk about
how that extended your duty, how that affected your duty in Germany, the Berlin crisis, because that's when Berlin was pretty much splitting up right about that time.
During that time, we got orders that I will extend it to ETS at the end of service.
So during that time, I thought about it and I
I made a decision that I was going to stay in the Army.
Right.
Then I looked at long range.
I said, well, I'll make the Army of my career.
And so I ran this for six years and then came back to the States.
And then that's when I moved to Fort Riley, Kansas.
Right.
After the 1963.
Right, right.
What was your duty in Bamberg, though?
What did you do there?
I mean, as it pertained to the Berlin crisis or anything else?
I was assistant squad leader in the Scott section.
Yeah.
Assistant squad leader.
I made a sergeant over there.
And then I was assistant squad leader.
And then also was assistant squad leader in full ride of cancer.
I see.
You came back to Fort Riley, 1963, spent there about two years.
In 1965, you were assigned 25th Division to Hawaii, and that sort of set the path to Vietnam.
Sort of, let's fast forward to that time and the time that you went in country to Vietnam.
Talk about that.
Yes, I rotated to Hawaii to the 4th of the 7th Cap.
And then once I got there, we got orders that we were going to be deployed to Vietnam.
Right.
We left Hawaii,
in January, by way of Okinawa, where we drew all our combat equipment, tested our equipment, and then we left there and went to LST to South Vietnam.
I landed in Cuan Yang, and then the A-Troop, they went down to Coo Chi.
Right.
How long of an LST trip was that?
Do you remember?
Five days.
Was that kind of rough?
Well, the sea was calmer that time.
You know, the LSD is a flat body boat.
So the sea was calmer that entire trip was going over there.
Talk about 19 Delta Recon, what the unit it was, and you were a recon specialist, right?
Right.
A reconnaissance specialist.
Talk about what your duty was, what you were trained to do, sort of give us an idea of what the job was of recon.
It was kind of a search and destroy type of outfit, right?
Well, as a scout, you normally go out and your mission is to seek out the enemy through evasive maneuvers so you don't
You don't want to be detected.
So our job is basically to go out and find the enemy.
So that's basically what the scouts would be doing, i.e.
a recon troop would be doing to seek out the enemy.
We'd go and find them, and then we'd move, wait for further assistance from other Army units to come up.
Was it a dangerous job?
Very dangerous.
In what way?
Tell me.
There were some testy times, obviously.
Well, if you're in Vietnam, you don't know why the Vietcans are.
You're in the jungle.
You know, you have to move with caution.
You know, so it's very dangerous.
So you have to protect yourself and your fellow man.
Right, right.
You weren't directly involved in firefights, but you were on the outer edges of firefights.
Is that right?
Quite a few of them.
Yeah.
You told me about one time that your actual, that you came in contact with the landmine, that your armored personnel carrier got blown up, right?
Well, we was in an LZ, I can't recall the LZ right now, but in any way the... A landing zone, right?
Right, it's a landing zone.
We had set up a perimeter and normally about
Once a day, we would get a hot meal.
So my mission was to go back with my squad to receive a hot meal.
And on the return trip back, that's when I hit a landmine.
The front differential on the APC was blown completely off.
The track was off.
And the 50 caliber mounted on the PC was blown off.
And I was blown back in the cargo hatch.
Were you injured?
No, not injured.
Well, bumps on my head, stuff like that.
It wasn't that serious.
But you realized, there was one time you realized that you were in a war.
Most definitely.
And this was for real.
But the armored personnel carrier, that's quite a vehicle, right?
Talk a little bit about it.
We're going to see a picture of one here in a little bit.
But talk about that because that was your vehicle of transportation, right, was this?
Right.
Our vehicle configuration was that the scout section had four APCs.
The platoon leader had an APC, and we had two tanks and an infantry carrier, which was also an APC, and then a multi-carrier M106.
Right.
So that was the recon configuration of vehicles we had.
Right, right.
And how many of these APCs were there in your division?
I mean, you say there were four of them, is that right?
In our platoon, it was five.
Well, actually, five APC and an M106 motor carrier.
Right.
Because motor carrier is where you have the 4.2 motor on it, and then you can ground mount it and then work from it.
Right, right.
I think you described your, as a recon, you were sort of the eyes and the ears of the division.
Right.
Sort of continue with that.
Sort of talk more about that.
Usually when a troop or a squadron get a mission, a troop would get assigned a mission, and then we would go out and select the areas and flush out the enemy, seek the enemy, find out where they are, and then we would pull back to the squadron commander and then back to the division.
right right what did a young charles smith think about at this time i mean you you're a young kid you just graduated from high school you did have the tour of germany so you had been overseas but now you were in vietnam you were in the vietnam war and you didn't know from day to day what the next day would bring what were your what do you recall now so many years later is what your thoughts were then as a young man well my thought was to stay alive yeah stay alive and and that we knew was in a dangerous situation
So my job was to keep our troops motivated, my section motivated, so we can perform our mission.
Yeah.
And it was dangerous.
Very dangerous.
It was dangerous work.
Right.
Malaria became a problem in Vietnam, especially as the monsoon season came along, because it would obviously bring along the mosquitoes.
And six months into your tour, you contracted malaria.
Talk about that, how you got sick, how you knew you were sick, and sort of where that took you.
Well, for about two or three days, I noticed I was running kind of a high fever.
I kept going to the medics.
And then I think about the third day, my fever had reached about 105.
So they had to medevac me back to the rear and then further medevac me to Natrang.
I was treated in Natrang.
And then after Natrang, I was sent back to the state to Johnson Field Hospital in Japan.
That's why I stayed in Japan until I got cured.
Right.
Were you real sick?
I mean, you had the fever, obviously.
Oh, very sick, very sick.
I think I spent about 30 days, 30 to 60 days in the train.
In the hospital?
In the hospital.
Them just curing you there and just trying to get you.
Well, use a medication, and they make sure that you have to use cold water to bring your temperature down fast, so they make sure the temperature didn't rise again.
Right, right.
That was the most dangerous thing about malaria.
We were talking earlier about...
malaria was really considered another enemy of
another one of our enemies because it was affecting our troops and uh so we sprayed for malaria and the vietcong would sometimes go after those who were doing the spraying because they realized that malaria was part of what was helping them right yeah indeed um you finished your tour of vietnam and you went to uh tell us about you were at an r r uh station
That's sort of how you finished up your tour overseas before you came back to the United States.
Talk about that duty and what that involved.
After I was discharged from the hospital, Johnsonville Hospital, I then moved to Camp Zama.
In Japan.
It's a Far East, a Far East overseas replacement company.
Then we stayed there until we got orders coming back to a unit in the state.
Right.
And while I was there, I worked at the Ordnance Center, and then my job was there to
get the guys coming out of Vietnam.
They usually landed in Tachikawa, Air Force Base.
Then we would take them back to Camp's Army and process them.
Right.
And then after the R&R, 7-day R&R is over, then we take them back and then get them on the plane, and then they will move, go back to Vietnam.
I see.
So they were going one way or the other.
Some of them were going home, some of them were heading to Vietnam.
Either way, it was sort of a processing center.
Right.
And that's where you worked for, what, about the last two or three months of your tour?
Is that right?
I worked there until I got orders to come back to the States.
Okay.
And then you came back to the States.
Then they just moved you around like crazy after that.
I was looking at it, and I think that I've got this right.
You first went to Fort Hood, 2nd Armored Division, back to Fort Riley, and then you were back to Germany again, to Augburg, Germany, because it's the 24th.
And now we're looking about 1967 to 1969.
Talk about that tour of Germany, if you remember that in Augburg.
That was the 2nd Battalion 7th Armour, Station Augsburg.
Once I got there, then that's when I found out we were going to be redeployed back to Fort Riley.
As you know, the 1st Division had been deployed to Vietnam.
So the 24th came back to Fort Riley.
And then I stayed there at Fort Riley with the 24th Division.
Then we would go back to what they call a reforge operation.
30 days, go up and do maneuvers, and then come back to Fort Riley.
I see.
And then they move you some more.
You wanted to go to Alaska.
You had a friend that was in Alaska, said, come on up to Alaska.
It's great up here.
That's where you wanted to be assigned, but instead you were assigned to South Korea.
Well, a friend of mine wrote me back and said, well, you know, you should come to Alaska.
And I reenlisted and asked for Alaska, but then they sent me to Korea.
Talk about that duty.
What was that about?
Korea was, I was with the 4th of the 7th Cavs in Korea.
It was a duty that we was close to the DMZ.
I was about a mile and a half from Freedom Bridge.
Freedom Bridge.
Just going across into the DMZ.
I didn't do any DMZ operation, but we did go over there and train a lot.
They had other units.
Units rotate to go up on the DMZ to secure that area.
Right, right.
And then back to Fort Ord, California, a training command there.
Is that right?
Right.
Talk about that.
The training command, I was in a training command.
I was an instructor.
And then we basically trained it in AITs.
And we basically trained them in squad tactics and leadership courses that we had right there in Fort Ord.
Right.
Now, this was in the early 70s, 70s, 73, right around there.
So you were a trainer then.
Now, what rank were you here then?
Were you a sergeant then?
I was a staff sergeant.
You were a staff sergeant at that time.
And then of all places, they're going to send you back to Germany.
They figured that Charles Smith knew Germany pretty well.
And this time, you went back to Bamberg, which had been your first deployment.
Right.
In Germany.
I was with the second or second ACR, the Army Cavalry Regiment.
And that...
That tour of duty is why we pulled border patrol.
We pulled border patrol out of Coburg, Germany.
I had a tour up in Hof, and this unit, that's all they did was border patrol.
I came back to the States in 70, latter part of 73 to 74, because my father was sick, and I got a compassionate reassignment back to Fort Hood again.
Back to Fort Hood.
Right.
But you weren't through with Germany.
Because you did another tour, a fourth tour of Germany, and this was at Schwabach?
Schwabach, Germany.
Right.
Talk about that.
That was, I was with the first of the first CAV, ACR.
That's Army Caval Regiment.
And we basically just trained, and we would go up and relieve the second ACR.
on their boarding duty.
And then at that point, I was a recon platoon sergeant then.
I see.
And then finally you came back to the United States for the final time, Fork Polk, Louisiana?
That was your final assignment, right?
Fork Polk, Louisiana, so I retired.
Is that right?
What would you do there?
Were you in training there?
Were you a trainer there too?
I was in the 4th and 12th Cavalry, another cavalry unit, and then I was a recon between the sides and there.
So a lot of training going on there, right?
You were teaching other soldiers to be soldiers, right?
Well, they was revamping Pope then for the, they call it in surgery training.
In other words,
close hand-to-hand combat in a town, in city, that kind of training.
It's a big training post right now for the U.S.
Army.
Got a couple of photographs here, as a matter of fact, that Charles loaned to us and showed us, and I want to go to them.
First, we're going to see a picture of young Charles Smith when he was 18 years old.
So this is, I guess this is your enlistment photograph, is that right?
Right.
You're just a young kid, and they're just not knowing exactly where life's going to take you.
But you're excited to be in the Army, it looks like.
So you were 18 years old then?
18 years old.
Good-looking soldier.
Talk about this unit, and where was this taken?
This mission was taken in Fort Knox, Kentucky.
It's an advanced NCO course, armored NCO course that is required for any senior NCO.
So I had a chance to, it was a 12-week course.
And that is the class picture we take him in.
That's right.
You're in the second row.
You're standing next to the guy that appears to be out of uniform.
He's a Marine.
OK.
So he's the one Marine in the picture, and you're standing next to him.
And finally, I want to give people an idea of what the armored personnel carrier, what we're talking about.
And that's a lot of machine there, Charles.
That gave you some measure of safety, didn't it?
Well, back then, yes, it did.
But, you know, you have the armor around you, but, you know, an RPG can go through that.
Oh, sure.
Yeah.
Now, the fellow that is in front, that's the driver, right?
The driver.
And then the fellow up top is the commander.
That's the track commander.
And it was a four-person crew, right?
And the cargo hatch is open, and they have two gunners.
on each side of the APC.
Right.
Wow.
I asked you when we were visiting before if you had any ideas that you might be reassigned to Vietnam after you left the first time.
And you didn't really think so, not only because you were an only surviving son, but also because of the malaria, you were pretty sure that you wouldn't be assigned back to Vietnam, right?
And eventually I never did.
Right.
I never come back when I was going back to Vietnam.
Right, right.
Stayed in Lafayette for three months there at Fort Polk, and then your life just took a whole change.
You retired from the Army in 1981?
January 1.
Right.
And you had some sisters up in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, so you went up there.
I have a sister living in Fort Worth and one live in Dallas.
Right, right.
I stayed with my sister in Fort Worth for about three months, and then I got hired into the Postal Service.
So you just thought you were through working for the federal government.
You had another 22 years to work for them, right?
I was living for another career.
Talk about that.
Talk about two decades in Fort Worth with the Postal Service.
What did you do up there?
Well, the Postal Service, I was an AFC operator, an advanced official counsel machine that counseled all first-class mail.
And I worked on that machine for 18 years.
Right.
And then I retired from that in 2002.
I see.
So you just went to work every day working on that machine?
Right.
Was it good work?
I mean, you obviously spent 22 years in Fort Worth.
You obviously got fond of the area, I guess, right?
Well, the machine operator was, you didn't have to be supervised because nobody knew what you were doing.
Right.
So you take your job seriously.
You cancel the letters.
All the supervisors want you to do is keep the machine going.
Right.
That was basically your primary mission, keep the machine going so it wouldn't shut down.
Were you working around people that were generally your age?
Were there other veterans that you were working with also, other Vietnam veterans?
Quite a few veterans in the postal service that I was working with.
Right.
And then, of course, we had young ones that came in that wasn't veterans.
I also worked with them, too.
Right, right, right.
So 22 years there.
And then talk about the decision after essentially 42 years away from Brian, you made the decision to come back.
come back to Bryant, the place where you grew up.
Talk about that decision rather than staying in Dallas-Fort Worth.
What made you come back home?
Well, I have a lot of property here in this area.
The home house, we have some land out in Rita, Texas.
And then much of my business was centered around Bryant, the Brazos Valley.
So I thought it was a good idea for me to move back and so I was close to the business ventures that
If I needed to take care of something, I was here to take care of it.
Right, right.
So I moved back to make brine courses.
Oh, where's my home?
So I just made it official.
Right.
And you moved into a house that actually you rebuilt on the same spot where it is now that had been your mother's house.
Is that right?
My baby sister was born in a house and my mother in 1990 built a new one.
Right.
And I promised I'd take care of it.
So I moved back in the house now.
Right.
That's where I'm living.
And that's where you're still living now.
Having grown up in the Brazos Valley, graduated in 1960, I guess you've seen a lot of changes in Bryan and College Station and the university area and all of that in the years since you first went to school here.
The place has changed a lot, hasn't it?
I've been here seven years, I'm still getting lost.
All those new streets there.
Well, you know, sometimes you got to get your GPS out and either look at a map or
You know, A&M has grown since I left.
When I left, I think A&M was an all-male college, which didn't go according to 1968.
Exactly.
So you can see the tremendous growth that A&M has had since I left and came back.
Right, right.
Talk about your family.
You have a son who lives here.
Is that right?
I have a son who lives here.
He has one son himself.
He works in the oil industry.
I see.
And you have a daughter who is a nurse in Topeka.
I have a daughter, and she has two kids.
Right.
Daughter and son-in-law that live up there, right?
My daughter has two kids, one son and a daughter.
My granddaughter, she's taking a course in journalism.
And my grandson is going to the University of Kansas to be an engineer, and then he's on track.
Right.
Now, I know you're really proud of that.
He's just graduated from high school, right?
Right.
So he'll be a freshman at the University of Kansas, and he got himself a track scholarship.
And your son-in-law used to be a coach.
He's going to quit coaching so he can watch his son run track.
Is that right?
Well, he decided to stop coaching, and he's just going to teach, and so he can be available to help his son with his track.
Right.
And getting through the college there.
You talked about one time recently that you were up there visiting your...
your daughter and your son-in-law and your grandkids, and you decided to stop by Fort Riley just to see the old place, and you didn't recognize much.
Is that right?
Grown tremendously.
I got lost going up in Custer Hill.
I had to get a map just to get it on post.
Of course, you know, with 9-11, Fort Riley used to be an open post.
Now it's completely enclosed.
So you must have a DOD decal to go in and out of the post now.
Right.
So it's really have grown since 1960.
Yeah.
Or even when you retired in 1981.
Right.
Things have changed a lot.
Charles, when you look back at your career, your 42 years, 20 years in the Army, and 22 years working for the Postal Service, is there anything that you'd change?
Would you have done it all over again the same way?
I feel if I had to, I'd do it again.
Right.
I'd do it all over again.
Yeah?
Yeah.
So our forefathers and the things we went through, the World War II veterans, they made it possible for us.
So if I had to, I would do it over again.
Right.
You come in contact now with a lot of veterans, not only Vietnam veterans, but World War II veterans also, because you are very involved with military organizations like the VFW.
You've been with them for a long time, Disabled American Veterans, American Legion, Vietnam Veterans Association, Elks Lodge.
Talk about your...
your involvement with that, especially VFW, where you're Officer of the Day.
Is that right?
Right.
Well, I've been with the VFW for 27 years.
On my cap, you see my hash mark only comes for 25.
Three more years, I'll be able to put another hash mark, which gave me 30.
I've been with the American Legion for 13 years.
Disabled Veterans of America, I've been with them 21 years.
Vietnam Veterans of America and the Elks Lodge, I've been with them three years, three years each.
Right, right, right.
Proud of your involvement with them, VFW especially.
Obviously, it's an active organization here, but you're looking for new and you're looking for younger members over there at the VFW because folks like you and I and the World War II veterans, we're not getting any younger, so we need the younger people to get involved, the younger veterans that are coming back from Desert Storm or even Iraq and Afghanistan, right?
I'm part of the recruiting committee.
Okay.
And we're waiting for the... Do some recruiting here.
...national to come out with a new Bruce here.
They're coming out with a stand-up policy, how to recruit, and then we're getting their Bruce here, and then we're going to streamline ours as to how we can go out and track new, especially the Iraqi and the Afghanistan veterans.
Of course, you've got the Delta Storm.
Right.
Young veterans we're trying to get.
The VFW has also adopted a unit.
We also have the 420th Engineer Battalion.
It's one of our adopted units.
I see.
So we work with them very closely.
So if you're talking to a young veteran who's coming home right now or that aren't involved in VFW or an organization like that, what do you tell them?
Why should they get involved?
Well, we try to educate them as to what the VAF numbers does.
We're a non-profit organization.
We're there for veterans.
We help veterans.
And all our veterans organization, you have service officers.
So if you have a young veteran coming back that need assistance in filing claims, we have service officers in these organizations that can help them.
Right.
Right, so it's obviously to their benefit.
And I know that you all have a lot of programs for youth and for kids.
You have the Patriot's Pen, you have the Voice of Democracy program and all of that.
So it's a wonderful organization.
You all don't just get over there and party.
You actually do some community service, right?
And that's what you want people to know.
That's right.
You've had a remarkable career of service.
And like I asked you, you said that you would do it all again if you had to
to do it all over again.
And you've had some health problems, you've had some health issues, but right now you look fit as a fiddle, so you're taking care of yourself.
You don't worry about it.
Yeah.
I had an open heart surgery in 95, so I just take one day at a time.
You just get up, go do your exercise, and move on.
Whole new lease on life, right?
Thank you for your service.
And thank you for being here.
Thank you.
In his retirement, Charles Smith does stay involved as a member of several military organizations, like we said, the VFW, the DAV, the Vietnam Veterans Association, the Elks Lodge.
And you can bet that he'll be making his way to Kansas when he can to watch his grandson run track for the Jayhawks, a well-deserved retirement after more than 40 years of government service.
We salute Charles Smith for his service.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.